reowww Jim dia genial he's the author of
the JFK assassination the evidence today
and the publisher of Kennedy's and
king.com
he's written a four-part article on the
Kennedys and civil rights and this is
the fourth and final part now the last
part the last part deals with what
happened after because see the Kennedys
were looking as her bill was getting
through
they were looking even beyond that okay
beyond getting civil rights for black
Americans in the south JFK had read
Michael Harrington's book the other
America
I know wait wait a second he read Dwight
MacDonald's 13,000 word review of it
okay the book that came out in 62 I
think Dwight MacDonald's review was in
January of 1963 all right and so he
began to think that something is gonna
have to be done all right when he looked
at this what what Harrington is a book
all right
then there was an article in The New
York Times in October that he read and
so he brought in Walter Heller his chief
economic adviser and he said we're gonna
have to do something about this problem
these pockets of poverty and so at that
time was called an attack on poverty all
right right and at his last meeting with
his cabinet JFK mentioned the word
poverty six times and Jackie Kennedy had
those notes transcribed as she presented
them to Bobby Kennedy at the Justice
Department and he had them framed and
put on the wall but this story and again
this is something that almost nobody
knows this has a backstory to it and it
has a different character anybody ever
heard of before who I'd be willing to
wager 99% of the people who are going to
be watching this or listening to it have
never heard of and his name is
David Hackett David Hackett was a friend
of Bobby Kennedy's from prep school and
when Kennedy Bobby Kennedy became
Attorney General he was influenced by
his sister Eunice reiver
who was very interested in the rights of
the poor in court and also problems you
know delinquency right and so she said
well why don't you why don't we talk
Jack and they're creating something
called the President's Committee on
juvenile delinquency and so he did and
so Hackett was brought in to be its
executive director and eventually what
happened is that he began to show Bobby
Kennedy what he thought was the cause of
juvenile delinquency because he had read
a famous book by a guy named Lloyd Olin
called delinquency and opportunity and
Olin had the idea that Jill delinquency
was not a matter of personal adjustment
it was a matter of environment that kids
in slum areas did not have the
opportunities that middle-class and
upper-class kids in those areas did and
therefore because of that they turned to
delinquency and so Hackett became
convinced to that view yeah she brought
in Olin for an interview and he began to
show Bobby Kennedy the slum areas in
Washington sometimes they would fly up
to Harlem and Hackett would introduce
Bobby Kennedy to a gang member and they
would just talk and so Hackett then went
to the west coast he went to the barrio
in East LA and he went to the Watts
ghetto you know and they got JFK to
submit a bill to Congress to run 16
demonstration projects on how to count
around you know this problem of youth
turning to law breaking things in these
areas all right and David Hackett ended
up having 12 full-time employees and a
budget of 3
million dollars all right and he had not
by the time JFK's death he had not he
said put it all together yet because
what who's working on at this time was a
fact that what might work in say Harlem
might not work in East LA all right
and so they decided on what was called
Community Action that is involving the
people in the community with what
schedule of opportunities they wanted to
have in other words they would vote for
their leaders and then they would vote
what kind of government grants they
wanted to get you know things like for
example legal services okay or daycare
centers you know this is like
participatory budgeting kind of thing
that right right and so the important
thing to remember though is that Hackett
wasn't really done with his research at
this time all right
and so when JFK is assassinated he calls
in Walter Heller okay and Walter Heller
tells him about what he had talked to
JFK about and he says it sounds like my
kind of program alright and Howard tells
him about Hackett and what he was doing
and his demonstration project and how he
wanted to expand them and see this is
where the difference between Johnson
can't be come in because Johnson was a
new dealer he worked under Roosevelt
Franklin Roosevelt the New Deal and so
he looked at this as that kind of a
thing whereas Hackett specifically told
Bobby Kennedy that approach woman that
worked you need much more planning and
much more research it has to be
fine-tuned it's not something you can
just throw a lot of money at I don't
think it's gonna work that way but
Johnson didn't want to do that he didn't
want to continue with it he wanted to
get it out there as fast as possible you
throw a lot of money in it you know and
it was away see because Johnson thought
the civil rights bill was really JFK's
alright but the war on poverty had not
been announced it had not been written
up so he decided that he would make that
his program and so if you can believe it
six weeks after his meeting with Walter
Heller Johnson goes before the country
in a nighttime version of the State of
Union address and he says this
administration today here and now
declares unconstitutional war on poverty
in America it will not be short or easy
no single weapon or strategy will
suffice but we shall not rest until that
war is won the richest nation on earth
can afford to win it we can't afford to
lose it so this became Johnson's war on
poverty the problem as many people have
stated is that four months later
what does Johnson do he now announces a
Great Society so in the space of four
months he announces the war on poverty
and the Great Society and as many people
have noted the Great Society was really
aimed at a middle class you know things
like Medicare public broadcasting
Department of Transportation Highway
Beautification and it was much more
expensive than the war on poverty right
now the other thing to remember Dave is
that Johnson has even run for president
yet right and he's out of the gate with
these two big programs already in fact
he ain't even nominated for the
Democratic candidate yet right
but in his manic almost you know driven
state to separate himself from JFK of
course what happens David Hackett is
retired to the sidelines he begins
working on Bobby Kennedy's senatorial
campaign in New York and Bobby Kennedy
writes Johnson he says in my opinion the
anti-poverty program could
actually [ __ ] the solution of these
problems unless Hackett's basic approach
was used well that didn't make any
distance David Hackett the guy who knew
more about it than anybody is now on the
sidelines and what happens with the
Community Action experiments that he
felt so highly about they are not going
to go down the way he wanted them to go
down Johnson did something very
surprising he assigned Sargent Shriver
to be in charge and the war on poverty
and everybody surprised at this because
Sargent Shriver already had a job it was
running the Peace course why give the
guy two jobs you know but he did and so
Bobby Kennedy and Denis Shriver
convinced Johnson that some of the
options should be things like head start
and Upward Bound and the kids but but
Sargent Shriver didn't really believe in
the in the Community Action Program he
actually said it'll never fly and
Johnson told them you make it work I
don't care about the details so what
happens is that Sargent Shriver now
along with Johnson turns it into
essentially a big jobs program a job
training summer jobs work-study
assistance to small farms and small
business and the Vista program which was
a decent idea it's like a Peace Corps in
the United States so there are other
parts of the administration got involved
the part where they get a piece of the
action
Department of Agriculture the Office of
Education etc all right now
the problem was that and bobby kennedy
was worried about this is that if you
did away with the whole aspect of
community action which he and Hackett
insisted should be won by the people in
the slum areas then what would happen is
the money being spent on this program
would be fought over by the state
and local mayors and superintendents of
Education they would want the money
alright and David that's what happened
alright that's what happened and so
people like Richard Daley in Chicago say
we think the local officials should have
control this program all right and the
same thing with the Superintendent of
Education in Chicago we think we should
be running this program you know and so
when Bobby Kennedy became senator he
debated this issue with the Chicago
Superintendent of Education and he said
if you take it over what is going to be
the guarantee that the school district
is going to go ahead and serve the
interests of the kids and the young
adults that were aiming the program at
okay and his reply was that it would be
the school community in the form of
local groups of parents well
since Bobby Kennedy was working on this
with David Hackett he replied well many
of them don't have parents they don't
have two parents anyway they might have
one maybe they have a group in the
community it's going to come down but
that's kind of difficult because you're
working very low wages and making forty
or fifty dollars a week and it's
difficult to take off and go down there
I think we have a responsibility these
people who are less fortunate than we
are to make sure that the money that's
being expended is going to be used so
that we don't have to talk about this
twenty years from now you know and he
later added that the institutions which
affect the poor but his education
welfare recreation business labor are
large complex structures they operate
outside the individual's control they
plan programs for the poor not with them
part of the sense of helplessness and
futility
comes from the feeling of powerlessness
to affect the operation of these
organizations and I think that's pretty
much accurate and I put in some examples
of how this took place how the community
action
was taken over all right and it didn't
really benefit the people who was aimed
at all right sadly and by the way that
goes on to this day I know this from my
own experience working in high schools
right well you shouldn't read that you
have a quote from Richard Daley the
mayor of Chicago in here I think you
should read it it really gives an idea
of the the kind of paternalistic
attitude of these guys yeah yeah and it
defeated the aim of the program at least
the way to David Hackett had a plan all
right um now as I mentioned in here
there were a few places where community
action programs did work well and I
described one in Mississippi because it
had good leadership the local mwp chief
got together with a very enlightened
white businessman you know and they made
it work it worked it worked fairly well
but by 67 Johnson had essentially given
up on Community Action lost all faith in
it sargent shriver eventually became the
ambassador in France and I believe as
most of his people believe that LBJ
began to lose faith in this with the
explosion of the Watts Riots in August
of 1965 and that happened when a
policeman arrested a slightly drunk our
driver at it well I think it was 116th
and Avalon in once a crowd begins to
gather the police call in reinforcements
and the crowd begins to throw rocks and
bottles at the cops it then explodes
into violence and the champ begins that
was ring through the last half of the
60s burn baby burn and during the next
six days a 46 square mile section of LA
turned into a battle zone
alright and I really do mean that it was
a battle zone when it was all over there
were 34 dead over 1,000 injured 977
buildings damaged and about 4,000
arrests
and Johnson couldn't believe it when
Martin Luther King was trying to call
him on the first day wouldn't accept any
calls when he finally came out of his
bedroom you know he said how is it
possible after all the good we've
accomplished you know how could it be
now he's stuck in a very bad situation
because he can't he can't praise the
writers because they're breaking the law
but if he goes too far then that's gonna
start a backlash against his war on
poverty all right um
Bobby Kennedy probably had the best
understanding even beyond king of what
had happened okay and once he said that
you know commenting on the police
symbolism he said the law does not
protect those in the ghetto from paying
too much for bad and inferior goods it
doesn't protect them from having their
furniture repossessed or quote from
having to keep lights turned on on the
feet of their children at night to keep
them from being not on by rats all right
and he also criticizes civil rights
movement for not spending enough time
outside the south to develop leaders in
those areas all right so now that of
course that began a rolling series of
inner-city volcanic explosions that took
place in 1966 1967 and 1968 are a grand
total of about 300 urban centers went up
okay and and by the way there were even
a couple worse in watts and we I
described a couple here one in Detroit
in 1957 you know one in Newark New
Jersey in 1967 all right
the one in Detroit Johnson had to stand
in not the National Guard but the army
to put that one down
that would ended up with 43 people dead
7,000 arrests 13 1300 buildings burned
to the ground and 2700 businesses looted
all right it did
really was kind of you know apocalyptic
what was happening there so by and by
the way and if you combine this with the
demonstrations against the war that are
getting out of control
it really seen you know like America was
caught in the Maelstrom yeah all right
by 1966 King had separated himself from
Johnson all right he can't understand
why we're spending all this money on
Vietnam and stripping away the war on
poverty er and he begins to make
speeches on this issue
so now you had but Johnson wouldn't give
up in January of 1966 his State of the
Union address he says we can still keep
on doing all three we can wipe out
poverty we can build a Great Society and
fight the war in Indochina and win all
of them and this is where the whole
credibility problem begins all right
because the public just sitting to see
that happening so now you get a reaction
on the right that is George Wallace now
begins to go national and people like
Ronald Reagan and Richard Nixon begin
understanding that appeal and then of
course on the left you get people like
the Weathermen and Bernardine Dohrn and
the SDS and people like Stokely
Carmichael and H rap Brown all right
take over the Student Nonviolent
Coordinating Committee so in reaction to
that Jay Larson goes ahead to the CIA
starts up mhm chaos which of course was
surveillance an operational program
against the left in the United States
and he gets together with Hoover and he
goes to COINTELPRO all right all right
so now there is essentially America
split apart now all right and you got
the FBI the CIA trying to disrupt these
student and civil rights organizations
well Bobby Kennedy didn't want to take
that path he actually means to Tom
Hayden the president of SDS at the time
and he says
I'm going to try and convince the
network so do documentaries on the slum
areas and to really show life the way it
is and really go ahead and broadcast
what the real poverty stats really
aren't all right and six months after
that meeting the Detroit riot hit and
Bobby Kennedy not predicted that Johnson
would give up on the Great Society which
he did by the way Johnson appointed a
committee called the Kerner commission
led by Illinois Governor Otto Kerner to
go ahead and investigate what happened
and there were a lot of good people in
that committee like Jim Korman a
congressman from California Senator
Edward Brooke of Massachusetts and the
famous you know takeaway quote from that
was America is dividing in the two
societies one black one white separate
and not equal both RFK and King were
very disappointed that Johnson did not
take up the challenge that the Kerner
commission presented but he didn't
alright it was this and I think people
most people should understand this by
now it was the combination of the racial
rioting and the Vietnam War which split
asunder the whole Democratic liberal
coalition that Roosevelt had put
together all right and it gave a great
opportunity to the Republican concerned
coalition all right in order to peel
away what they called the hardhat
Republicans that they thought would be
there and also to break apart the
Democratic dominance in the south all
right and so people like Kevin Phillips
and Pat Buchanan who both worked for
Nixon began to write up plans in order
to do just that
and people like Ronald Reagan who was
beginning as a California governor in 66
and Nixon who was going to run for
president again in 68 now began to harp
on the Law & Order theme in this shadow
and smoke of watts Detroit and Newark
while the Vietnam War was raging every
night on TV and he had films of sts
protesters being clubbed in the streets
by policemen and what made it even worse
of course was when Johnson signed the
Civil Rights Act of 64
he told Bill Moyers I think we just
delivered the south to the Republican
Party for my lifetime in years you know
because that gave the Republicans the
opportunity to exploit white backlash
and boy did they ever you know Nixon
began in with this his Southern Strategy
you know he started appointing these
southern judges of the Supreme Court and
a blatant appeal to the south and then
there's the famous in 1980 Ronald
Reagan's speech at the Shelby County
Fair in Mississippi what he uses
kickstart his campaign and that of
course he started screaming about states
rights seven miles from the location
where the bodies of the three murdered
civil rights workers okay Murr fell in
16 years earlier all right
I think everybody knows what I'm talking
about that that movie Mississippi
Burning all right okay you know and that
of course was a blatant appeal you know
to white backlash all right but I want
to close the essay on the well before
let me just ask you one thinks I think
you're interesting that at the same time
obviously it's less less apparent and
these huge riots and the war in Vietnam
but you also have you know the kind of
the rolling back of the Warren
Commission you have the garrison trial I
mean and that stuff I think you could
tell me if I'm wrong but I feel like
that stuff was very much in the news and
that kind of conversation was another
example of the kind of narrative of
America slipping away
yeah like III think you're exactly right
on that because what that did the
revival of the Kennedy assassination
through our books like mark lanes and
Josiah Thompson's published in both in
67 and Jim Garrison's investigation of
the JFK case which went on from 57.69
that contributed to this cynicism that
was overtaken in the country about you
know our is our government really headed
in the right direction what are we doing
you know and and and if you take a look
at the charts on this of the money the
question about you know what is your
belief that the government is doing
things right most of the time that's
when it begins a toboggan slide from
about 64 to 70 it's like at a 45 degree
angle down when JFK was assassinated the
belief what level was at 75% 75% people
of the public the government is doing
the right thing most of most of the time
it begins a decline precipitously in the
mid 60s as his stuff is going on all
right and I don't think that's a
coincidence and then of course you're
exactly right
that contributed you know to this whole
confusion and cynicism about what the
heck was going on in America all right
good question David all right all right
and I closed with in part for this I
wanted to you know leave the reader with
a little bit of uplift so I went into
depth about two projects at Bobby
Kennedy and what JFK and RFK did the
first one Bobby Kennedy did the second
one the first one I just completely went
into depths and described what they did
in Prince Edward all right as I said
earlier those kids did not have schools
for something like three or four years
oh we were essentially they were
essentially shunted off into daycare
centers okay for and by the end of that
you know because like say if you were
six years old when it started you know
and you hadn't had his class in three or
four years
some of these kids didn't even know how
to hold a pencil when they finally got
in the classroom so what happened is
that some of the kids began to cross the
border in the North Carolina they began
to move some of the families began to
move some of them wrote letters to
relatives in other states you know can
can my kid come and live with you during
the school year because whenever schools
here all right and so what happened is
that Bobby Kennedy went ahead and called
in William vanden Heuvel all right and
said I want you to start a school system
and so he got the money hired a
superintendent Neal Sullivan
okay and had registration day and some
of the parents called and said we can't
afford school clothes while vanden
Heuvel got them the money all right and
if you can believe it there was a class
ratio in the high school of 12 to 1 in
other words 12 students for one teacher
most of the classes I had in high school
we're 35 to 1 right you know but that's
what a great job that vanden Heuvel did
all right the system opened September
16th 1963 was 1600 students all right
with 4 for whites was called the free
schools all right and they didn't it was
another thing they did because the kids
were out of school for so long they did
extensive testing before they started
the classes and they did not arrange by
age they arranged by aptitude okay so it
was a really remarkable experiment and I
found out about it through this guy
Brian Lee who has a PhD in history and
he did his master's thesis and his
dissertation on this and you can get it
online I link to it in this and there's
a really remarkable piece of work he's
going to try and get it
as a book now the other thing I ended up
on was our F K's bedford-stuyvesant
experiment that was the largest urban
ghetto out of the southside of Chicago
at the time but 400,000 people 70
percent of them african-american there
was no hospital no college not even a
local newspaper all right and so Bobby
Kennedy gave three speeches in the
latter part of 1966 about his ideas
about how to counteract these dreadful
ghettos within America and I think this
was a rebellion against Johnson because
he didn't like what Johnson did with
David Hackett so he went ahead and gave
these speeches and then he told to his
assistants um Adam walinski all right
and Peter Edelman that I want you to
write up the speeches and into a formula
and this is what I want to guide me as I
do this so he went around to the
business community like banker Andrea
Mayer and IBM chairman Tim Tom Watson he
went around to the foundations and he
started raising money and getting people
on the board of directors he he wanted
Watson to go ahead and put a factory in
bedford-stuyvesant he got a guy to put a
mortgage fool together so the people
could qualify for cheap loans all right
he brought a Dodge car lot into the town
he even got the University of New York
to open a branch which is later called
Medgar Evers College right and I got
I've got to tell this one story which I
left out of the article Bobby Kennedy
calls this big business guy out of the
blue one afternoon and says I want you
to know what I'm doing here and I want
your business to be on the board of
directors and I want you to contribute
to it and the guy goes senator with all
due respect if I walked in this
afternoon to my board of directors
and said we're going to contribute six
figures to this Bedford silent project
because Bobby Kennedy asked me to they
would have me committed but that's the
kind of guy that Bobby Kennedy was by
this time it didn't matter to him and so
he announces the formation and December
10th 1966 and he said now we're going to
go beyond community action we're going
to use all the powers we have of money
mind and skill to try and transform you
know this urban blight into something
more respectable and Harrington Michael
Harrington visited the area about ten
years later and he said you know this is
not a total success but it's really
interesting to see a good social idea
accumulate at least something of a
success these ended up being called
Community Development Corporation's and
today today there's 4,000 of them that's
how the idea was all right and so these
kind of replaced Johnson's equivalent of
the New Deal okay with the war on
poverty so those were two really
wonderful things I think that the
Kennedy should be really be proud of and
trying to counteract you know the
problems of Barrios and ghettos within
the United States of course with what
happened after you know Nixon and Pat
Buchanan those guys came in and it be
the new formula was benign but they
called benign neglect and slowly but
surely all of this stuff you know was
eventually dismantled you know and that
was a sort of the end of it we had one
really great quote in here it was
something along the lines of of course
you can make sure that everybody has the
right to travel on a bus wherever they
want but you can't put the money in
somebody's pocket to get them to buy a
bus ticket so it really really draws a
line between the you know that saying
people are free versus the actual
economic freedom to go and take event
things right that's how the Kennedys
looked at the problem in the North okay
and that's why Bobby Kennedy told Arthur
Schlesinger after the riot of Ole Miss
he says you think this was bad
what do you see what's going to happen
in the north okay because a problem was
much more complex here you know it was
it was a matter that you didn't have
legal segregation but it didn't matter
because these people did not have the
weather all see okay I want to go into a
nice restaurant and buy dinner
well I can't you know or let's go to a
hotel this weekend well we can't and
that was the way that they saw the
problem okay so that was them see with
the Kennedys the Civil Rights Act was
just the beginning of something you know
that's why I say you know that what they
planned on doing and this goes back to
the first part of my talk what they
planned on doing was finishing
reconstruction you know the total
failure that reconstruction was okay we
talked about earlier you know they
planned on going ahead and finishing the
job unfortunately you know for a lot of
different reasons it didn't end up that
way right well you've got a lot of like
that's amazing pictures that you put in
here it's a you know it's so in depth it
goes it goes far beyond what we were
able to talk about yes you know he
mentioned my webmaster al Rossi who did
a really great job you know on laying
this out and putting these pictures in
some really wonderful photographs you
know and then I then he said once you
put a bibliography in at the end which I
did and then he said why don't you list
of the major points that you made also
so I did I did dad also okay so al was a
very good health to this and thank you
so much David for giving me the
opportunity to talk about it you know
and address issue you know on your
wonderful
our hidden history website okay which is
a real boon to everybody all right
happy to have you anytime you write
these amazing histories but then you
also which i think is really important
you do these book reviews or reviews or
television shows where you kind of take
on the the narrative we're getting today
and and compared to the real real
history which i think is kind of what
it's all about so yeah thank you very
much is there anything else you wanna
know that's it thank you again Jim all
right good night David good night this
is our hidden history
you